---
title: Ventura County Leadership Whines About Sacramento
author: jason
layout: post
---

Our county leadership, its Board of Supervisors and its Executive Officer, are not happy about California's new efforts to keep citizens safe during the global panedmic that it hitting our state hard.  One day after the governor announced a new regional approach to slowing the spread of COVID-19, one that will be triggered by a region's available intensive care unit (ICU) capacity dropping below 15%, the county's saw its region's available ICU capacity drop below 15%.  In a [message](https://vcportal.ventura.org/covid19/docs/2020-12-05_Stay_Home_Order_Triggered_in_Ventura_County_and_So_Cal_Region.pdf) sent out to the county on Saturday morning, our leadership gave voice to thei unhappiness with the governor's new public health meaure.

Their message followed Republican talking points.  In it, they told us they were pushing back against Sacramento's new efforts to protect people because (1) Ventura County should not be placed in the large Sounthern California region aklong side counties that compare poorly to ours, and (2) there's insufficient data to warrant restrictions on local businesses.  In a way that feel coordinated, many other counties were saying the same thing to their residents.  

Let's assay these callous and selfish positions one at a time.

The first claim, of Ventura County's exceptionalism in Sacramento's regional framework, fell apart quickly before citizens received the email.  Sometime between when they drafted their message (Friday afternoon) and the time it was sent out, the county's own availble intensive care unit capacity was adjusted downward from 20+% to the triggering value of 15%.  So it turns out that we are dragging our neighbors into a stay-at-home state and not so much the other way around.  

The implied exceptionalism or their message should embarass county residents, too.  We are more like our neighboring counties than we are different.  Our county borders are pourus.  Think back to summer when LA County was closing its beaches.  My neighbors worried that LA residents would shift their coastal activites north to our beaches.  Similarly, when one county in the region exhausts its ICU capacity, other neighbors will be there to take our seriously ill.  In a pandemic, we need to loosen our grip on our hopes for local control of the county and create systems were we can work together against the virus.  Our county leadership has lost sight of this.

The second claim, that the state is not taking a scientific and data-driven approach to its public health measures rings especially hollow in our county.  This parroting Republican talking points could just as well be directed at county leadership themselves.  We have online COVID-19 dashboards and information pages, but there is no place to find information about results from contact tracing in the county.  In addition, the thin and repetitive county guidance on COVID-19 never mentions lessons learned from contact tracing.  The exception might be their vague claims that contact tracing data shows that business activity is not spreading the virus in the county.

So let's look at their claim that commerce is not a source of spread for COVID-19 in the county.  The way they talk, one would think that contact tracing clearly shows a very high percentage of cases results from contacts in healthcare setting, in the home, at non-commercial work places, and in social settings.  The contact tracing summaries we in Ventura County have can be found in the public record of meetings of the Board of Supervisors.  Agenda item number eight on [November 17th](https://ventura.granicus.com/DocumentViewer.php?file=ventura_58a3c87e35233d17ed380f3ab3956c34.pdf&view=1), [``Receive a Report Regarding the Novel Coronavirus and Associated Disease known as COVID- 19''](http://bosagenda.countyofventura.org/sirepub/cache/2/nrt2vftlf1kkruemtjj4jhv1/161598712052020082726157.PDF) is a slide deck that claims the [county takes a data driven approach to public health](/assets/images/2020-12-05-slide01.png).  On [slide 13](/assets/images/2020-12-05-slide02.png) they report the sectors in which COVID cases have appeared to date, listing  from Long Term Care Facilities (4.9%), Grocery and Food Services (1.9%), School (0.6%), and Other (8.5%).  Presumably these are most prevalent setting, but they account for less than 16% of all the cases.  [Slide 14](/assets/images/2020-12-05-slide03.png) shows that of the 464 cases discovered during the Halloween week, only 9.6% of cases were from large gatherings.  [Slide 15](/assets/images/2020-12-05-slide04.png) lists sectors of statewise COVID cases as Healthcare Services (50%), Other (15%), Restaurants (7%), Schools (1%), and Private Homes (0.8%).  These data tell us very little about the role of commerce in the spread of COVID-19, so for the county to imply that otherwise is disingenuous.  If there is data our leaders  are seeing and the public is not, have them share it in the same spirit that they are calling for the governor to share state-wide contact tracing data.

Yes, contact tracing is hard and the people who are caught in the network of questions resist implicating hosts and guests of gatherings that could have spread the virus.  This difficulty erodes the quality of the data and weakens any arguments that rely on that data.  That county leaders claim the data shows businesses should be held harmless as the virus borns through our county is rediculous.  The data just does not show that or the opposite.

As COVID-19 surges, county leaders needs to reflect on how they are communicating with citizens about the pandemic.  During 2020, they've been phoning.  Their strongest leadership takes the form of their consistent message, ``Community members are encouraged to wear masks, social distance, wash hands frequently and not gather.''  How well is this working out for us?

XXXXX
